# The compensation trap


Between 1966 and 1974 in French Polynesia, radioactive fallout from France’s atmospheric nuclear bomb tests had spread everywhere, throughout the environment and within the bodies of the inhabitants. Ever since, the question of the payment of reparations by France for the impact of the tests in its overseas territory has remained a highly sensitive issue. It was late on, in 2010, when Paris took a step towards recognising its responsibilities, with the creation of the CIVEN, a commission tasked with compensating civil and military victims of the nuclear campaign. 

A special procedure was introduced, whereby for a person to obtain recognition as a victim they must prove that they were living in French Polynesia at the time of the atmospheric tests, and also prove that they subsequently developed one or more of 21 illnesses, included on an official list of those that can be caused by exposure to radioactivity. That list has now increased to 23 illnesses. The applicant meeting those conditions is supposed to benefit from the presumption of causality between the illness that they developed and exposure to radioactivity. In principle. 

In reality, for victims, the recourse of the CIVEN has become equivalent to an unscalable wall. In the ten years since it was created, just 454 people have received an offer of compensation for cancers caused from exposure to radioactivity, while more than 80% of the cases submitted to it have been rejected. The rejected applicants have no means of knowing why they were turned down, because the commission provides no justification for its decisions, which are not made public.

Two recent decisions demonstrate the necessity for greater transparency about the process of granting a person the status of victim. These concern the cases of two sisters, born one year apart in 1964 and 1965, who are from the Raivavae atoll in French Polynesia’s Austral islands archipelago. Both of them developed breast cancer. While the details of their cases appear identical, they received separate and diametrically opposed decisions from CIVEN. The commission found that one of the sisters was exposed to a level of ionising radiation that was sufficient to grant her victim status, while for the other it found to the contrary and offered no explanation as to why.    

The secrecy and administrative complexity have ended up grinding down the hopes of the Polynesians, to the point where many do not even attempt to apply for compensation. “People are afraid to talk,” said Astrid Brander, who is from one of the Polynesian atolls worst-hit by the radioactive fallout. “In face of whites, they keep quiet.” The patriarch of her family, Tane Brander, died in 1994 from lung cancer which was officially recognised as having developed as a consequence of the nuclear tests. Two of his sons and one of his sisters also developed cancers that are caused by exposure to radioactivity, but they have never filed a claim for compensation. 

According to a confidential report that we gained access to, the French Polynesian health ministry estimates that there may be around 10,000 victims of the tests, located essentially in the zone stretching from Tahiti to the Gambier Islands. According to the calculations, all of them would have received an ionising radiation dose of more than 5 millisieverts (mSv), which is superior by 4 mSv to the minimum dose required before a victim can request compensation from the French state. 

But our investigation estimates that the number of victims is far higher even than that. Our reconstitution of the reality of the nuclear fallout from the atmospheric explosion in 1974 of one of the French bombs, codenamed Centaure, shows that all of the inhabitants of Tahiti, the largest and most populated island of French Polynesia, along with neighbouring islands from the Windward group, were exposed to a dose above 1mSv – the threshold amount officially required for a claim for compensation. That would mean that there are about 110,000 people – and not 10,000, as the local health authorities suspect – who could potentially demand compensation from the French state, should they develop one of the recognized cancers. Yet up until now, the number of Polynesians from the civilian population – that is, those who were not in the military nor among those specifically contracted as service providers – who have received compensation total just 63. That, a veritable fiasco, is down to several causes.

To begin with, Polynesians do not have to hand the medical information necessary for an official study of their situation, nor do they have sufficiently precise data to allow for an estimation of the ionising radiation dose they received. While 26 radiological monitoring stations were supposed to measure the impact of the fallout on the different islands, only 20% of the territory of French Polynesia was properly monitored. Added to this shortfall in geographic monitoring are the errors in calculations due to measurement errors and uncertainties. That was precisely the case in 1971, following the atmospheric explosion of a French nuclear bomb codenamed Encélade, when several dosimeters located on atolls had a margin of error of 50%. Thirdly, during its first seven years of existence, the CIVEN used a US software whose calculation methods were described as “wild” by one the commission’s former members (whose name is withheld). He added: “One day a refusal was even given to a guy who was literally pissing plutonium.”

As a result of legislation enacted in 2017 aimed at removing structural, economic and social inequalities between mainland France and its overseas territories, such anomalies in the compensation procedures were removed by putting in place of new criterium in 2020 for victims to gain recognition; this was that a person claiming victim status should prove that they were exposed to ionising radiation of more than 1 mSV in a given year. But while this facilitated claims from military personnel or staff from the French atomic energy commission, the CEA, the process for Polynesians remains an obstacle course. 

In its attempts to defend its actions, the inefficacy of which has been the target of criticism throughout its ten years of existence, the CIVEN systematically resorts to the same argument. Namely, that it is the CEA which, in 2006, carried out a re-evaluation of the ionising radiation doses suffered by the Polynesian population, and that its calculations were validated by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), regarded as a source of reference. The problem here, however, is that the document which is supposed to have validated the CEA calculations – and, in turn, the compensation data used by the CIVEN – has never been made public. But Disclose has now obtained a copy of the report in question – and discovered that the IAEA has validated nothing at all. 

“We were supposed to check that there were no enormous errors in the CEA study,” said a physicist who took part in drawing up the IAEA report. “We couldn’t do very much more.” Indeed, the scientists mandated by the IAEA did not have access to the original data from the period of the tests, which had not, when they worked on the report, yet been declassified. As noted in the report’s introduction, the scientists therefore proceeded on the assumption that “all the information, all the calculations and all the data provided [were] correct”. The final nail in the coffin for the CIVEN’s defence is that the study was directly commissioned and financed by the French defence ministry.

On February 18, 2020, the National Institute for Health and Medical Research (Inserm), commissioned by the Ministry of Defense, issued a soberly titled report: “Nuclear tests and health - consequences in French Polynesia”. According to this study, Inserm experts believe that “the links between the fallout from atmospheric tests and the occurrence of radiation-induced pathologies ” cannot be established. But they also specify that their “results do not make it possible to exclude the existence of health consequences ” and recommend “to refine the estimates of doses received ” by the local populations. A request already made to the State and Civen by victims' associations for nearly ten years.

<div class="story-navigator">
  <button class="story-navigator__btn" data-navigate="/investigation/moruroa-files">
    <svg class="story-navigator__icon" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0 0 492 492">
      <path
        d="M198.608 246.104L382.664 62.04c5.068-5.056 7.856-11.816 7.856-19.024 0-7.212-2.788-13.968-7.856-19.032l-16.128-16.12C361.476 2.792 354.712 0 347.504 0s-13.964 2.792-19.028 7.864L109.328 227.008c-5.084 5.08-7.868 11.868-7.848 19.084-.02 7.248 2.76 14.028 7.848 19.112l218.944 218.932c5.064 5.072 11.82 7.864 19.032 7.864 7.208 0 13.964-2.792 19.032-7.864l16.124-16.12c10.492-10.492 10.492-27.572 0-38.06L198.608 246.104z"
      />
    </svg>
  </button>
  <span class="story-navigator__label">The compensation trap</span>
  <button class="story-navigator__btn" data-navigate="/investigation/findings-of-investigation">
    <svg class="story-navigator__icon" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" viewBox="0 0 492.004 492.004">
      <path
        d="M382.678 226.804L163.73 7.86C158.666 2.792 151.906 0 144.698 0s-13.968 2.792-19.032 7.86l-16.124 16.12c-10.492 10.504-10.492 27.576 0 38.064L293.398 245.9l-184.06 184.06c-5.064 5.068-7.86 11.824-7.86 19.028 0 7.212 2.796 13.968 7.86 19.04l16.124 16.116c5.068 5.068 11.824 7.86 19.032 7.86s13.968-2.792 19.032-7.86L382.678 265c5.076-5.084 7.864-11.872 7.848-19.088.016-7.244-2.772-14.028-7.848-19.108z"
      />
    </svg>
  </button>
</div>
