# This
 editorial project began two years ago in a collaboration between INTERPRT, a collective of researchers, architects and spatial designers who focus on environmental issues, and the 
 _investigative_ 
 , multi-media newsroom Disclose. Our common objective was simple, but had never before been attempted, namely to fill in the missing pages of the history of France’s nuclear weapons tests in Polynesia. For this international investigation, we teamed up with researcher Sébastien Philippe a member of Princeton University’s Science and Global Security programme. His task was to scientifically analyse, one by one, all of the information and data recorded by the French military at the time of the tests. This interactive platform exposes, for the first time ever, the information that has been hidden from public debate by the French authorities for five decades.

In this unprecedented investigation, we studied the contents of a mass of documents from the French defence ministry. Classified until 2013, these archives of around 2,000 documents were finally made public as a result of a long legal battle between the French state and the victims of the nuclear tests. Until now, the documents have never been studied in their totality. We reorganised them by date and subject matter and have now filed them into a database that can be accessed by victims of the tests, researchers and the wider public. Along with the study of the documents, we carried out interviews with more than 50 people, including 18 inhabitants of Polynesian atolls, 16 former military personnel, as well as with magistrates, scientists and organisations from civil society in both French Polynesia and mainland France.

Using 3D modelling tools and the visualisation of data, we have reproduced, for the first time ever, the events that followed the most contaminating of France’s atmospheric nuclear explosions carried out between 1966 and 1974. We also re-evaluated the extent of the radioactive contaminations these caused, and in which the civilian populations were the principal victims.
